---
layout: post
title:  "AST - Get Familiar with ROSE AST"
author: "@chunhualiao"
date:   2019-08-09
categories: beginner
tags: [rose,ast]
image: freecompilercamp/pwc:rose-develop-weekly
---

# Tips:

Code snippets are shown in one of three ways throughout this environment:

1. Code that looks like `this` is sample code snippets that is usually part of an explanation.
2. Code that appears in box like the one below can be clicked on and it will automatically be typed in to the appropriate terminal window:
```.term1
vim readme.txt
```

3. Code appearing in windows like the one below is code that you should type in yourself. Usually there will be a unique ID or other bit your need to enter which we cannot supply. Items appearing in <> are the pieces you should substitute based on the instructions.
```
Add your name here - <name>
```

## Features
This is a tutorial to use a few tools to visualize AST

---

# A. Overview

The goal of this tutorial is to learn how to use a few pre-built tools of ROSE to generate dot graphs of AST.
AST stands for Abstract Syntax Tree, which is the internal tree representation of an input source code.
Getting familiar with AST is the first step to develop program analysis and translation tools operating on AST.

# B. Build/Install AST Tools
Build the pdf generator
```.term1
make -C $ROSE_BUILD/exampleTranslators/PDFGenerator install
```

Build and install the dot graph generators
```.term1
make -C $ROSE_BUILD/exampleTranslators/DOTGenerator install
```

Build and install the AST text generators
```.term1
make -C $ROSE_BUILD/exampleTranslators/defaultTranslator install
```

# C. Obtain Example Input Codes

Clone the rose-ast git repo
```.term1
git clone https://github.com/chunhualiao/rose-ast.git
```
Enter rose-ast
```.term1
cd rose-ast
```
Change a script which sets the environment variables for using ROSE
```.term1
vim set.rose
```

Please replace ROSE_INS's value to be /opt/install/rose_install

Finally, source it to set the environment variables.
```.term1
source ./set.rose
```

Test if rose-compiler is in your path
```.term1
which rose-compiler
```

The command line above should generate an output like
```
/opt/install/rose_install/bin/rose-compiler
```

# D. Generate a simple dot graph for an input file
rose-ast already stores dot graphs and their pdf and png versions for a set of C/CPP/Fortran files.
You can browse these files.

Alternatively, you can clean up everything and generate a dot graph by yourself.


Clean up all previously generated dot files.
```.term1
make distclean
```

Generate a simple dot graph for func1.c
```.term1
dotGenerator -c func1.c
```

Check the generated dot file
```.term1
ls func1.c.dot
```

# E. Generate a whole dot graph for an input file
A whole AST dot graph contains more information related to symbol tables, types, etc.

Generate a whole dot graph for func1.c
```.term1
dotGeneratorWholeASTGraph -c func1.c
```

Check the generated whole ast dot file
```.term1
ls func1.c_WholeAST.dot
```


# F. Generate a pdf output of AST
Dot graphs cannot be easily visualized. So there is another tool to generate pdf file from large input files.

Generate a pdf output for class.cpp
```.term1
pdfGenerator -c class.cpp
```

Check the generated pdf file
```.term1
ls class.cpp.pdf
```

[Download the generated PDF from the Sandbox here.](/home/freecc/rose-ast/class.cpp.pdf;application/pdf){: .sandbox-dl}

# G. Generate a text output of AST (horizontally printed)

Try to process func1.c
```.term1
textASTGenerator -c func1.c
```
It should generate a text file. 
The entire AST text file has many builtin functions in the beginning. 
Let's view the last 15 lines of it.
```.term1
tail -n 15 func1.c.AST.txt
```
You should see something like the following:
```
            │   └──@0x7f1c4e998410 SgFunctionDeclaration func1.c 1:1 "::foo"
            │       ├──@0x7f1c4ec59500 SgFunctionParameterList func1.c 1:1
            │       │   └──@0x7f1c4e479bf8 SgInitializedName func1.c 1:13 "i"
            │       │       └── NULL
            │       ├── NULL
            │       └──@0x7f1c4e1b9010 SgFunctionDefinition func1.c 2:1
            │           └──@0x7f1c4e252010 SgBasicBlock func1.c 2:1
            │               └──@0x7f1c4e157010 SgReturnStmt func1.c 3:3
            │                   └──@0x7f1c4e186010 SgVarRefExp func1.c 3:10
            ├── NULL
            ├── NULL
            └── NULL
```
The text output clearly shows the tree representing the function foo in the input file. Besides the tree structure, each line starts with memory address of an AST node, its source file name, line:column numbers, and qualified names, if applicable. There are NULL pointers in the AST. You can safely ignore them. 
```
int foo(int i)
{
  return i;
}
```

# H. Rebuild all dot graphs

There is a makefile within rose-ast. You can use it to rebuild all the files.

Rebuild all dot files
```.term1
make all
```

# References

For more information about AST visualization, please check
* https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/ROSE_Compiler_Framework/How_to_visualize_AST
